---
id: configuration
title: Configuring Pyre
sidebar_label: Configuring Pyre
---

# Persistent Configuration

You can generate an initial configuration in the root of your project with
```bash
$ pyre init
```

This will create a basic configuration file at `.pyre_configuration` containing,
for example:
```bash
{
  "binary": "/Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.6/bin/pyre.bin",
  "source_directories": [
    "."
  ]
}
```

You can extend this configuration to configure Pyre for your project's specific
setup and needs. The following configuration options are supported:

`source_directories`: List of paths to type check. Defaults to current directory.

`autogenerated`: A list of paths to omit from type-checking. This may be useful for
generated files, virtualenv directories, etc.

`binary`: Location of pyre binary. This can be specified to gradually upgrade a Pyre
binary in a CI setting.

`logger`: If set, Pyre will invoke the binary passing it statistics in JSON format.
The statistics contain information about Pyre's performance as well as information about
the project's type coverage.

`search_path`: List of paths to stubs and external modules to include in the typing
environment. For example, typeshed third-party modules. Pyre will use those paths to
build up the typing environment but will *not* check files found in the search path.

`typeshed`: Path to the [Typeshed](https://github.com/python/typeshed) standard library, which
provides typed stubs for library functions.

`workers`: Number of workers to spawn for multiprocessing.


# Command Line Arguments and Flags

The Pyre command line flags can be summarized by running `pyre --help` or `pyre -h`:

```bash
$ pyre --help
usage: pyre     [-h] [-l LOCAL_CONFIGURATION] [--show-error-traces]
                [--output {text,json}] [--verbose] [--noninteractive]
                [--show-parse-errors] [--binary-version] [--build]
                [--target TARGET] [--source-directory SOURCE_DIRECTORY]
                [--search-path SEARCH_PATH] [--preserve-pythonpath]
                [--typeshed TYPESHED]
                {check, kill, incremental, initialize init, rage, restart,
                start, stop} ...

positional arguments:
  {check, kill, incremental, initialize (init), rage, restart, start, stop}

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -l LOCAL_CONFIGURATION, --local-configuration LOCAL_CONFIGURATION
                        Use a local configuration
  --show-error-traces   Display errors trace information
  --output {text,json}  How to format output
  --verbose             Enable verbose logging
  --noninteractive      Disable interactive logging
  --show-parse-errors   Display detailed information about parse errors
  --binary-version      Print the pyre.bin version to be used
  --search-path SEARCH_PATH
                        Additional directories with modules and stubs to
                        include in type environment
  --preserve-pythonpath
                        Preserves the value of the PYTHONPATH environment
                        variable
  --typeshed TYPESHED   Location of the typeshed stubs

buck:
  --build               Build all the necessary artifacts.
  --target TARGET       The buck target to check

source-directory:
  --source-directory SOURCE_DIRECTORY
                        The source directory to check
```

## Positional Arguments
If [Watchman](https://facebook.github.io/watchman/docs/install.html) is
installed, running `pyre` with no positional arguments defaults to incremental,
otherwise defaults to check.

`check`: Run Pyre.

`kill`: Kill the Pyre server.

`incremental`: Run Pyre and spin up a Pyre server, which listens to watchman changes in
your repository, and to changes reported by VSCode or Nuclide editors via LSP Protocol.
Subsequent runs of Pyre will be much faster than running Pyre from scratch with `check`.
Running `pyre` with no positional arguments defaults to `pyre incremental`.

`initialize`, `init`: Generate a basic `.pyre_configuration` file in the current directory.
Searches for a path to your Pyre binary and typeshed stubs.

`rage`: Print server logs for debugging or for context when reporting server errors.

`restart`: Restart the Pyre server.

`start`: Start the Pyre server.

`stop`: Stop the Pyre server.


## Flags
These flags can be passed in before any of the positional arguments above. For example:
```bash
pyre --source-directory "." --noninteractive check
pyre --source-directory "." restart
```

`--local-configuration LOCAL_CONFIGURATION`: Call Pyre specifying the path to a local
configuration outside of the current working directory.

`--noninteractive`: Disable interactive logging, which by default overwrites intermediate
logging output and adds colors for a more streamlined user experience.
Non-interactive mode ensures all terminal output remains visible.

`--output {text, json}`: Formatting for error return values. Defaults to text.

`--preserve-pythonpath`: Use the `$PYTHONPATH` environment variable to search for external
sources. This environment variable is ignored otherwise.

`--search-path SEARCH_PATH`: Provide additional stubs or modules external to the project
being type-checked. Can also be set in `.pyre_configuration` or often lives in the
`$PYTHONPATH` environment variable (see `--preserve-pythonpath`).

`--show-error-traces`: Display more verbose error messages which include a more detailed
reason and relevant source code locations (for example, what line a type conflicting
  type was specified on).

`--source-directory SOURCE_DIRECTORY`: Provide a path to the source root to check. Can also
be specified in `.pyre_configuration`.

`--typeshed TYPESHED`: Path to the [Typeshed](https://github.com/python/typeshed) standard library,
which provides typed stubs for library functions. This can also be set in `.pyre_configuration`.

`--verbose`: Enable verbose logging. Most useful when used in conjunction with `--noninteractive`.

`--version`: Print the current version of Pyre.
